# NGS-data-analysis
Next-generation sequencing (NGS) is an emerging technology to determine DNA/RNA sequences for whole genome or specific regions of interest at much lower cost than traditional Sanger sequencing. Next generation sequencing (NGS), massively parallel or deep sequencing are related terms that describe a DNA sequencing technology which has revolutionised genomic research. Using NGS an entire human genome can be sequenced within a single day. In contrast, the previous Sanger sequencing technology, used to decipher the human genome, required over a decade to deliver the final draft. Although in genome research NGS has mostly superseded conventional Sanger sequencing. 
There are a number of different NGS platforms using different sequencing technologies. all NGS platforms perform sequencing of millions of small fragments of DNA in parallel. Bioinformatics analyses are used to piece together these fragments by mapping the individual reads to the human reference genome. Each of the three billion bases in the human genome is sequenced multiple times, providing high depth to deliver accurate data and an insight into unexpected DNA variation. NGS can be used to sequence entire genomes or constrained to specific areas of interest, including all 22 000 coding genes (a whole exome) or small numbers of individual genes. The applications of NGS are rapidly expanding, and this calls for efficient and creative data storage, analysis, and visualization methods. 

Being a Bioinformatics student, here we will see the details of analyzing the data.
Each NGS experiment generates large quantities of complex data consisting of short DNA reads.  Although each technology platform has its own algorithms and data analysis tools, they share a similar analysis ‘pipeline’ and use common metrics to evaluate the quality of NGS data sets.  Analysis can be divided into three steps: primary, secondary, and tertiary analysis. 
1) Primary analysis is the processing of raw signals from instrument detectors into digitized data or base calls. These raw data are collected during each sequencing cycle. The output of primary analysis is files containing base calls assembled into sequencing reads (FASTQ files) and their associated quality scores (Phred quality score). 
2) Secondary analysis involves read filtering and trimming based on quality, followed by alignment of reads to a reference genome or assembly of reads for novel genomes, and finally by variant calling. The main output is a BAM file containing aligned reads. 
3) Tertiary analysis is the most challenging step, as it involves interpreting results and extracting meaningful information from the data.
 
 
 output :
[ngs.docx](https://github.com/mahima1820/NGS-data-analysis/files/9926325/ngs.docx)
